
### Mathematics as a Language

A language is a system of [[communication]].  Mathematics is a system of communication and as such it must have [[syntax]] or (script of symbols) in which it is written, a [[vocabulary]] (which are the objects and verbs and the connecting operations), [[grammar]] (which are the rules for combining words), and most importantly a [[community]] of people who use it to communicate and exchange ideas and thoughts.  Mathematics meets the definition of a language and is a [[universal language]] that transcends culture, spoken language, and geographical location.  It is the language of science and precise [[knowledge]].

Mathematics begins with the abstract study of [[counting]] and [[order]], which is a study known as [[2. Arithmetic |Arithmetic]].  Together with the study of [[measurement]] which deals with notions of continuous functions and notions related to our intuition of space and time, and the related notions of area, volume, continuity, and variation.  The study of measurement is called [[Geometry]] or more generally Analytic Geometry, or [[Mathematical analysis]].  

[[2. Arithmetic |Arithmetic]] and [[Analysis]] are the two poles  Arithmetic expresses the language of the discrete or countable, whereas Analysis inquires into the notion of measure or distance and the continous.  These concepts are often expressed using the language of [[Algebra]] which allows us to define rules that facilitate the symbolic manipulation of the quantities.   This ability to do algebra gives access to many advanced techniques that allow for the systematic analysis of many types of problems.  [[Algebra]] is the fabric that connects Analysis and Arithmetic.

 [[2. Arithmetic|Arithmetic]], [[Algebra]], [[Analysis]] together with [[Logic]] are the core of math.  The study of math concerned with the [[structure]], [[patterns]] and [[symmetries]] and involves the concept of [[Infinity]] which represents unbounded quantity, as well as the domain of the infinitely small or infinitesimals.  

These are ideas are expressed using the foundation of [[logic and reasoning]] which allows those using this language to prove or disprove various results using a logically consistent and rigorous derivation.   Math seeks to create a solid logical foundation to all of its results. Sometimes results are derived by [[contradiction]],  meaning the opposite result is assumed and then a contradiction is derived.  

In general we start with a small number of assumptions which we call the [[Axioms]].  These are the things we assume without proof.  All other results are either new definitions or results arrived to through logical deduction.  [[Proofs]] are either [[constructive]] meaning they have an [[algorithm]] (procedure or formula) for creating a certain result, or non-constructive or [[existence proofs]] which deduce the existence of a result without constructing a specific example.  

More generally mathematics is the language of numbers and the generalized structures that are abstracted by deep study of the properties of numbers.  These number systems known as the [[Integers]], [[Rationals]], [[Real Numbers]], [[Complex Numbers]], [[Vector Spaces]], [[Metric Spaces]].  These number systems, are connected and their related Geometric, Arithmetic, and [[Algebraic structure]] shows an intricate web of relationships and patterns exist within them.

Mathematics is without a doubt a very complex and difficult subject.  For this reason people are often turned off by its difficulty and complexity.  For this reason mathematical knowledge in the general public remains at the elementary level.  However these days access to advanced computing tools can help facilitate both the instruction and visualization (which develops intuition).  Thus making it possible to explore mathematics at a higher level and gain intuition through through the use of tools.

Whole numbers are easy to imagine, real numbers on which the [[Calculus]] is based, a little more work is involved in understanding their subtle nature. Notions of continuity, limits, differentiation, integration, etc.  are intuitive but difficult to make precise. Completeness (the key feature of the real numbers) implies that there are not any "gaps" or "missing points" in the real number line.  However making such concepts precise involves understanding complex definitions and using imaginative ways of perceiving the abstract entities that are "Real Numbers".

[[Rational numbers]] or fractional numbers are expressed as ratios of integers.  These numbers have "gaps" at each irrational value such as $\pi$, or $e$, or $sqrt(2)$.  Rational number may approximate a point with arbitrary precision but the point itself is defined by the limit of an infinite sequence of rationals. 

Real numbers that express the geometry of points in space are by their very nature beyond the scope of whole numbers and thus require the idea of limit of an infinite sequence.   This limit is not a construction that can be done in practice, thus just like infinity of the infinitely large, the limit of the calculus explores the concept of the infinitely small an idea certainly considered since ancient Greece as in Zeno's Paradox, and Euxodus theories of Measure.

The underlying foundation of mathematics is Logic.  This is how we determine the validity of results through various techniques of Proof. The axioms define the basic objects and the rules of logic are then used to derive all other results.  If any result is found to be in contradiction with existing results then whatever original assumptions led to it must be false.  

Sometimes it may be impossible to prove a particular statement, in other words, math may contain statements which may never be proved in terms of the existing body of knowledge.   This is a result of the nature of logic and its relationship to arithmetic that was proved by Kurt Godel in the 20th century.

The [[axiomatic system]] has used since the time of the ancient greeks and was first written explicitly by [[Euclid]] in his foundational text known as "[[Euclid's Elements]]".  This classical text is the foundational text for the study of Mathematics.  

More generally Mathematics is a language of [[form]], [[pattern]] and [[symmetry]].  It provides us with a way to describe ideas and concepts about space, quantity, change, and use this elegant and precise language to communicate a large body of knowledge about the world.  Indeed the physical world appears to be described at least in part in terms of mathematical language.  Physics is written in the language of math.

"Mathematics is the language in which God has written the universe." according to Galileo.  Galileo went on to use the language of math to describe laws of motion of terrestial objects.  This application of math to describe motion together with the scientific method gave birth to modern science. 

> [The universe] cannot be read until we have learnt the language and become familiar with the characters in which it is written. It is written in mathematical language, and the letters are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without which means it is humanly impossible to comprehend a single word.  
> 
> _Opere Il Saggiatore_ p. 171.

[[Newton]] through his [[Calculus]] or provided a precise description of the motion of planets and in general the motion of bodies subject to the force of gravity.  This was one the most sweeping intellectual achievements in the history of science.   Newton's invented both the tools (his method of fluxions) known as Calculus, and also discovered the laws of motion. This was published in his famous book "Principia Mathematica".

After the development of the Calculus knowledge expanded rapidly.  Great mathematicians in the 18th, 19th, and 20th century greatly advanced the subject.