#### Computational Mathematics

We motivate our study of mathematics by using modern calculating tools.  In present times using computers we can calculate very easily. We make use of sophisticated [[computing tools]] throughout our study.  There are many tools available, but the purpose of this instruction we use [[Cocalc]].  Cocalc (https://www.wikiwand.com/en/CoCalc) is open source platform for computational mathematics.  It is available both online (cocalc.com) and on desktop and provides a free and easy to use platform for learning and practicing advanced mathematics.  Cocalc uses [[Jupyter notebooks]] for interactive computing.

As we learn to use [[Cocalc]] we will learn various languages such as [[SageMath]] which is an extension of the popular [[Python]] language which is usually the base platform in numerical computing as provides the high level interface to many sophicated numerical software libraries written and maintained by a large community.   These libraries cover everything from numerical computing, linear algebra, machine learning, visualizations and much more.  

Indeed the sheer amount of software available is so vast that it would take a long time to learn  these.  Here instead we present the tools and apply them as needed while working to understand the basic underlying ideas and concepts.

All of our material will be published via github which will be our collaboration hub.  Our study will proceed to first by going over the basic principles of logic, arithmetic, measurement, algebra, symmetry and other concepts.  Whenever possible we try to show the relationship that exists between these apparently different aspects of math.  

Mathematical language is constructed by the interplay between invention and discovery.  Indeed sometimes it requires invention to discover something.  Sometimes in asking questions about something lies an invention yet to be conceived. 

This was indeed the case when complex numbers were created by inquiring into what number squared $i = \sqrt{-1}$ so that $i^2 = -1$.  If did not conceive of $-1$ we could not imagine $i$, unless we conceive of $0$ we cannot conceive  $-1$, and we cannot conceive $0$ without the notion of $1$, and without the notion of one there is no notion of number or counting unit and hence no sequence of numbers.  One leads to zero which leads us to $-1, i, -i$ and indeed to the complex numbers $a + bi$.

This progression of invention and discovery took over the span of centuries.  The amount of mathematical knowledge exploded over the last few centuries.  This knowledge includes foundational concepts, ideas, techniques, applications and provided the foundational language for much of modern science.  

Indeed all of modern physics is expressed in the language of mathematics.   It is in fact difficult to imagine modern physics without mathematics first, since many of the ideas at the core of modern physics are mathematical in essence.  Also included in math is also Computer Science and other areas known as discrete mathematics, which deals with finite collections.  Computer Science is also mathematical in nature.

Our approach to study will be informal and explorative.   We can first provide an overview and then provide [[paths]] to [[deepen our study]].  Starting with the foundations, interrelationships between fields of study.  We the use of software tools to enhance our understanding and knowledge.  Using software tools we also position ourselves favorably to be able to create practical applications of these concepts later on in our study.

After our study of foundations, in the second year we will focus on applying our foundational knowledge through applications to science, physics, chemistry, biology, computer science, machine learning,  and other fields.  